JSS Journal of Statistical Software

June 2008, Volume 26, Book Review 1.

http://www.jstatsoft.org/

Reviewer: Hadley Wickham Rice University
Data Manipulation with R
Phil Spector Springer-Verlag, Carey, NC, 2008. ISBN 978-0-387-74730-9. 154 pp. USD 54.95 (P).

Introduction
This slim volume provides a solid introduction to many of the most useful functions and packages for importing, manipulating and processing data in R. The R project provides an environment for statistical computing and data analysis. There are many books on statistics in R, and a few on programming in R, but this is the first book devoted to the first part of a data analysis: getting the data into R and into a form that you can work with.
Book contents
The book covers fundamental R data structures, data import and export, and data processing. Chapter 1 starts the book with an introduction to the basic data structures of R (vectors, matrices, lists, and data frames), and tools to describe and to convert among them.
Chapter 2 discusses how to get data into and out of R: from text files (CSV, tab delimited, and fixed width), Excel (with the RODBC or gdata packages), binary files, and from the output of other statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, etc., with the foreign package). It also covers using connections to access data over Web or in a zip file; techniques for generating data from random numbers, sequences and permutations; and output to text and binary files. Chapter 3 continues this theme with a discussion of connecting R to databases, to both extract and update data, and includes a brief introduction to SQL. The chapter focuses on MySQL, an open-source database, but the ideas are applicable to any client-server database.
Chapters 4, 5 and 7 describe useful operations on dates, factors and strings. Chapter 6, which describes subsetting, seems a little out of place here, and might be best read after Chapter 1. These chapters are brief, but cover the essentials: the various date formats, how to parse strings into dates, and how to extract various components; creating and manipulating factors; extracting parts of strings, and a brief introduction to regular expressions.

2 Data Manipulation with R
Chapters 8 and 9 conclude the book with tools to aggregate and reshape data. As well as just describing useful functions, Spector also suggests some good ways to think about the problems. Chapter 8 includes aggregation by hand with loops, the apply() functions and split(); and with pre-built functions like aggregate(), by(), and the reshape package. Chapter 9 covers tools for manipulating columns of a data frame (transform(), ifelse(), recode()); combining data frames (cbind(), rbind(), merge()); and reshaping with the reshape package.
Conclusion
Overall, this is a useful well-written book, and I think would make a good second book for the R user. There are a few technical errors: character vectors are smaller than factors, not larger; and methods() should be used to find methods of a function, not apropos(). The SQL chapter would have benefited from a discussion of SQLite, which is much easier to set up than MySQL, and in particular sqldf provides a particularly smooth transition between data frames and database tables. The code in the book is well laid out and easy to follow, although more spaces after commas would aid readability, and prefer the convention of using <- for assignment. The book currently lacks a Website or supporting package where all code and data can be downloaded. Hopefully this will change in the future.
Reviewer:
Hadley Wickham Rice University Department of Statistics Houston, TX, United States of America E-mail: h.wickham@gmail.com URL: http://had.co.nz/

Journal of Statistical Software
published by the American Statistical Association
Volume 26, Book Review 1 June 2008

http://www.jstatsoft.org/ http://www.amstat.org/
Published: 2008-06-18

