JSS Journal of Statistical Software

February 2012, Volume 46, Book Review 2.

http://www.jstatsoft.org/

Reviewer: Dirk Eddelbuettel Debian Project
R in Action
Robert I. Kabacoff Manning, Shelter Island, NY, 2011. ISBN 978-1-935-18239-9. 472 pp. USD 59.99. http://www.manning.com/kabacoff/
The book R in Action by Robert Kabacoff is a very good introduction to R. This short review will highlight several strong points of the book, and also mention a number of shortcomings which unfortunately detract from what is overall a very commendable introduction. The book is divided into four parts. The first, titled "Getting Started", provides a gentle introduction into getting and installing R. This is followed by a chapter on creating datasets, and another with an initial introduction to graphs. Two chapters on basic and advanced data management ­ which also cover data structures, control flow and functions as a first introduction to programming ­ round out this part. The second part is the shortest of the four. It contains a simple overview of basic statistical methodologies. It focuses on descriptive statistics and plots, as well as basic inference. This is followed by the third part "Intermediate Methods" which is the longest of the four parts. Comprised of five chapters, it begins with regression analysis and covers a wealth of material including regression diagnostics and post-regression analysis. A chapter on analysis of variance follows, after which power analysis comes back to inference before a chapter on intermediate graphs completes this part. The final part focuses on advances methods and contains four chapters. Generalized linear models extend the previous coverage on regression. Principal component and factor analysis cover multivariate statistics. The third chapter discusses missing data problems in some depth before a last chapter comes back to graphics with a discussion spanning lattice, ggplot2, and interactive graphics. Besides these four core parts, the book also contains eight short appendices. These provide a (useful but somewhat mixed) collection of tips and discussions ranging from graphical user interfaces, customization of the R startup to data and graph export, a reminder on matrix algebra, an enumeration of all the many packages used in the book and two more sections of large data as well as on updating an R installation. This all is good material, but one wonders if it could not have been folded into the main section. Throughout the book, Kabacoff displays a fine mastery of R idioms which reveal a genuine

2 R in Action
familiarity with the material, and the underlying statistics. This is indeed a book one can learn from on a number of issues. I found only a few minor issues: The discussion of annotating data in Chapter 2 could have benefitted from mentioning the comment or attributes functions. Similarly, the recoding of the age variable in Section 4.3 could be done more compactly using cut. In Table 5.5, the chart displaying a normal distribution uses a fixed set of points from pretty leading a to piecewise linear curve even though curve(dnorm) could have been used for a smoother display. Chapter 5 calls looping inefficient and suggests apply functions though this is no longer as clear-cut as it once was given the improvements to the R parser. Similarly, a few issues reveal some shortcomings in the editing of the book. Plots appear to be using different default fonts even within the same chapter. Some graver errors remain: The derivation of the ordinary least squares esimator in Section 8.2 misses a minus sign in the last and major equation. And maybe worst of all, in a book filled with countless citations of other works, there is no bibliography or reference section to actually provide details of the quoted works. These shortcomings notwithstanding, Kabacoff has provided a very good book which introduces R in a hands-on manner covering an admirable breadth of material. R in Action should find broad use in many introductory and even intermediate courses on R as well as for selfstudy by researchers and practioners alike.
Reviewer:
Dirk Eddelbuettel Debian Project Chicago, IL, United States of America E-mail: edd@debian.org URL: http://dirk.eddelbuettel.com/

Journal of Statistical Software
published by the American Statistical Association
Volume 46, Book Review 2 February 2012

http://www.jstatsoft.org/ http://www.amstat.org/
Published: 2012-02-21

